Fetch Object serialization optimization (#949)
moq-wg/moq-transport: draft-ietf-moq-transport.md

~~~
{: #object-fetch-format title="MOQT Fetch Object Fields"}

The Serialization field defines the serialization of the object. The
following code points are defined:

|------|--------------------------------------------------------------------|

> | Code | Description                                                        |

Author: I like the idea of merging the Extension bit into the Serialization byte. 

> One potentially painful serialization is N subgroups and the object IDs rotate amongst them 

That would be its own punishment. None-the-less, it is still better than the status quo, which is to always repeat all 3 IDS. We can invent ever more codes for ever more inefficient schemes, but we should probably design the optimization for the majority use cases and let the more exotic ones be slightly more verbose.

> | Code | Description                                                        |

Author: @afrind    Commit https://github.com/moq-wg/moq-transport/pull/949/commits/90f67b11663ff8ce14b78f26c0f2db8ce09075a6 reformats as a table and adds the new code points to allow for removing priority and extension length bytes.

> | Code | Description                                                        |

Reviewer: Oops missed your comment from April

> let the more exotic ones be slightly more verbose.

I think increasing object IDs within a group amongst 2 or more subgroups may actually be fairly common -- eg it matches the layered encoding schemes folks have been discussing.  The other option for handling Object IDs across multiple subgroups is something like `sg=0` has object IDs `0...Q-1`, `sg=1` had object IDs `Q...2*Q - 1`, and so on.

> | Code | Description                                                        |

Author: @afrind We have used up our 8 options for a 1 byte serialization field. How would you propose adding in the use case of layered coding where objects IDs increase across multiple subgroups? By removing 0c6 and 0x7 and replacing them with a hard-coded case of odd/even across two subgroups called 0 and 1 ?

|------|----------|----------|-----------|-----------|----------------|
| 0x0	 | Yes      | Yes      | Yes       | Yes       | Yes            |
|------|----------|----------|-----------|-----------|----------------|
| 0x1	 | Yes      | Yes      | Yes       | Yes       | 0              |
|------|----------|----------|-----------|-----------|----------------|
| 0x2	 | Yes      | 0        | 0         | Yes       | Yes            |
|------|----------|----------|-----------|-----------|----------------|
| 0x3	 | Yes      | 0        | 0         | Yes       | 0              |
|------|----------|----------|-----------|-----------|----------------|
| 0x4	 | Prior    | Prior    | Prior + 1 | Prior     | Yes            |
|------|----------|----------|-----------|-----------|----------------|
| 0x5	 | Prior    | Prior    | Prior + 1 | Prior     | 0              |
|------|----------|----------|-----------|-----------|----------------|
| 0x6	 | Prior    | Prior +1 | Prior + 1 | Yes       | Yes            |
|------|----------|----------|-----------|-----------|----------------|
| 0x7	 | Prior    | Prior +1 | Prior + 1 | Yes       | 0              |

> |------|----------|----------|-----------|-----------|----------------|

Reviewer: ```suggestion
|------|----------|----------|-----------|-----------|----------------|
| 0x8	 | Prior    | 0 | Prior + 1 | Yes       | Yes              |
|------|----------|----------|-----------|-----------|----------------|
| 0x9	 | Prior    | 0 | Prior + 1 | Yes       | 0              |
|------|----------|----------|-----------|-----------|----------------|
```

{: #fetch-header-format title="MOQT FETCH_HEADER"}

> Each Object sent on a FETCH stream after the FETCH_HEADER has the following format:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Each Object sent on a FETCH stream after the FETCH_HEADER has the following
format:
```

~~~
{
  Serialization Flags (8),
  [Group ID (i),]
  [Subgroup ID (i),]
  [Object ID (i),]
  [Publisher Priority (8),]
  [Extensions (..)],
  Object Payload Length (i),
  [Object Status (i),]
  [Object Payload (..),]
}
~~~
{: #object-fetch-format title="MOQT Fetch Object Fields"}

> The Serialization Flags field defines the serialization of the Object. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Serialization Flags field defines the serialization of the Object.
```

The two least significant bits (LSBs) of the Serialization Flags form a two-bit
field that defines the encoding of the Subgroup.  To extract this value, the
Subscriber performs a bitwise AND operation with the mask 0x03.

Bitmask Result (Byte & 0x03)	| Meaning
0x00	| Subgroup ID is zero

> 0x01	| Subgroup ID is the same as the Subgroup ID of the prior Object
> 0x02	| Subgroup ID is one more than the Subgroup ID of the prior Object

Reviewer: ```suggestion
0x01	| Subgroup ID is the prior Object's Subgroup ID
0x02	| Subgroup ID is the prior Object's Subgroup ID plus one
```

0x03	| The Subgroup ID field is present

The following table defines additional flags within the Serialization Flags
field. Each flag is an independent boolean value, where a set bit (1) indicates
the corresponding condition is true.

Bitmask |	Condition if set	| Condition if not set
0x04	| Object ID field is present	| Object ID is the prior Object's ID plus one
0x08	| Group ID field is present |	Group ID is the prior Object's Group ID
0x10	| Priority field is present	| See below
0x20	| Extensions field is present |	Extensions field is not present
0x40 | Undefined | Undefined
0x80 | Undefined | Undefined

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

If the first Object in the FETCH response uses a flag that references the prior
Object, the Subscriber MUST close the session with a `PROTOCOL_VIOLATION`.
```

When the Priority field is not present, the Publisher Priority of the Object
is determined as follows:

1. If the Object is the first in the FETCH response, the Publisher Prioirty is
128.
2. If the Object is the first Object in a Group and Subgroup included in the
FETCH response, the Publisher Priority is the same as the previous Object in the
response.
3. Otherwise the Object has the same Publisher Priority as the first Object in
the Group and Subgroup included in the FETCH response.

To decode a FETCH response, a Subscriber maintains a map of priorities for each
Subgroup in the current Group.  The Publisher MUST NOT encode a FETCH response
that would cause the size of the Subscriber's map to exceed 64 entries.

The Extensions structure is defined in {{object-extensions}}.

The Object Status field is only present if the Object Payload Length is zero.

> When encoding an Objects with a Forwarding Preference of "Datagram" (see

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When encoding an Object with a Forwarding Preference of "Datagram" (see
```

{: #fetch-header-format title="MOQT FETCH_HEADER"}

Each Object sent on a FETCH stream after the FETCH_HEADER has the following
format:

~~~
{
  Serialization Flags (8),
  [Group ID (i),]
  [Subgroup ID (i),]
  [Object ID (i),]
  [Publisher Priority (8),]

>   [Extensions (..)],

Reviewer 2: For consistency, ',' before ']'
```suggestion
  [Extensions (..),]
```

  Object Payload Length (i),
  [Object Status (i),]
  [Object Payload (..),]
}
~~~
{: #object-fetch-format title="MOQT Fetch Object Fields"}

The Serialization Flags field defines the serialization of the Object.

The two least significant bits (LSBs) of the Serialization Flags form a two-bit
field that defines the encoding of the Subgroup.  To extract this value, the
Subscriber performs a bitwise AND operation with the mask 0x03.

Bitmask Result (Byte & 0x03)	| Meaning
0x00	| Subgroup ID is zero
0x01	| Subgroup ID is the prior Object's Subgroup ID
0x02	| Subgroup ID is the prior Object's Subgroup ID plus one
0x03	| The Subgroup ID field is present

The following table defines additional flags within the Serialization Flags
field. Each flag is an independent boolean value, where a set bit (1) indicates
the corresponding condition is true.

> Bitmask |	Condition if set	| Condition if not set

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Bitmask |	Condition if set	| Condition if not set
------------------------------------------------
```

0x04	| Object ID field is present	| Object ID is the prior Object's ID plus one
0x08	| Group ID field is present |	Group ID is the prior Object's Group ID
0x10	| Priority field is present	| See below
0x20	| Extensions field is present |	Extensions field is not present
0x40 | Undefined | Undefined
0x80 | Undefined | Undefined

> If the first Object in the FETCH response uses a flag that references the prior
> Object, the Subscriber MUST close the session with a `PROTOCOL_VIOLATION`.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
If the first Object in the FETCH response uses a flag that references the prior
Object (0x04) or prior Group (0x08), the Subscriber MUST close the session 
with a `PROTOCOL_VIOLATION`.
```

When the Priority field is not present, the Publisher Priority of the Object
is determined as follows:

1. If the Object is the first in the FETCH response, the Publisher Prioirty is
128.
2. If the Object is the first Object in a Group and Subgroup included in the
FETCH response, the Publisher Priority is the same as the previous Object in the
response.
3. Otherwise the Object has the same Publisher Priority as the first Object in

> the Group and Subgroup included in the FETCH response.

Reviewer: I meant {group ID, subgroup ID}, but since we say in Object Model that subgroups are scoped to group, maybe that's implicit?

> 2. If the Object is the first Object in a Group and Subgroup included in the
> FETCH response, the Publisher Priority is the same as the previous Object in the
> response.
> 3. Otherwise the Object has the same Publisher Priority as the first Object in
> the Group and Subgroup included in the FETCH response.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. If the Object is the first Object in it's Subgroup included in the FETCH
response, the Publisher Priority is the same as the previous Object in the
response.
3. Otherwise the Object has the same Publisher Priority as the first Object in
it's Subgroup included in the FETCH response.
```

Reviewer 2: Suggest to change "If" in step 2 to "Otherwise, if"

To decode a FETCH response, a Subscriber maintains a map of priorities for each
Subgroup in the current Group.  The Publisher MUST NOT encode a FETCH response

> that would cause the size of the Subscriber's map to exceed 64 entries.

Reviewer 3: Does this imply the publisher can change the priority of a cached object when sending fetch response  rather than reflecting what is the canonical object stored in the cache  OR may be I am not clear of the condition this statement is making ?

Reviewer: In 8.1 Caching Relays: 

> An endpoint that receives a duplicate Object with an invalid Object Status change, or with a different Forwarding Preference, Subgroup ID, Priority or Payload MUST treat the track as Malformed.

Reviewer 2: > In 8.1 Caching Relays:
> 
> > An endpoint that receives a duplicate Object with an invalid Object Status change, or with a different Forwarding Preference, Subgroup ID, Priority or Payload MUST treat the track as Malformed.

But that does not disallow a Relay receiving Objects of a Track from upstream, then send Objects of the Track downstream and change the Priority of some Objects while sending downstream, right?

--------|------------------|---------------------
0x04	| Object ID field is present	| Object ID is the prior Object's ID plus one
0x08	| Group ID field is present |	Group ID is the prior Object's Group ID
0x10	| Priority field is present	| See below
0x20	| Extensions field is present |	Extensions field is not present
0x40 | Undefined | Undefined
0x80 | Undefined | Undefined

If the first Object in the FETCH response uses a flag that references the prior
Object, the Subscriber MUST close the session with a `PROTOCOL_VIOLATION`.

When the Priority field is not present, the Publisher Priority of the Object
is determined as follows:

1. If the Object is the first in the FETCH response, the Publisher Prioirty is
128.
2. Otherwise, if the Object is the first Object in its Subgroup included in the
FETCH response, the Publisher Priority is the same as the previous Object in the
response.
3. Otherwise the Object has the same Publisher Priority as the first Object in
its Subgroup included in the FETCH response.

To decode a FETCH response, a Subscriber maintains a map of priorities for each
Subgroup in the current Group.  The Publisher MUST NOT encode a FETCH response

> that would cause the size of the Subscriber's map to exceed 64 entries. The
> Publisher can only set the Priority field flag (0x10) to 0 for the first 64
> Subgroups in a Group in the response.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
that would cause the size of the Subscriber's map to exceed 64 entries.  In any
given Group in the response, the Publisher can only set the Priority field flag
(0x10) to 0 for the first 64 Subgroups.  All subsequent Subgroups in the Group
MUST set the Priority field flag to 1.
```

Reviewer: Ugh even this is incorrect -- the limitation is only on objects in the subgroup after the first, which is hard to say.

Reviewer 2: I see, then the wording should be slightly updated (I made a suggestion), as the existing wording seems saying a list of priority values for one Subgroup.

> Since one might send many DATAGRAMs in a Group, and in FETCH response they have unique subgroups, maybe we need to allow for a larger map?

First of all, I don't fully understand why Objects received from Datagram need to have Subgroup ID equal to Group ID, as when such Objects are fetched they have to be in the same stream anyway regardless of the number of Subgroups.

Secondly, if Subgroup IDs are equal to Group IDs, as we discussed earlier, it is pretty easy to compress using indication that the Subgroup ID is not present but equal to that of the previous Object plus 1, therefore, only one entry is needed (and even there is a couple gaps a couple of more entries is needed). Therefore, I think 64 is good enough.

Reviewer 2: > Secondly, if Subgroup IDs are equal to Group IDs, as we discussed earlier, it is pretty easy to compress using indication that the Subgroup ID is not present but equal to that of the previous Object plus 1, therefore, only one entry is needed (and even when there are a couple gaps then only a couple of more entries are needed). Therefore, I think 64 is good enough.

Aha, then some rewording is needed, as the map does not have to be continuous regarding Subgroup IDs, meaning e.g., the table could be { (SG0, 0), (SG101, 1)} for the case when there is only case of Group ID cap just prior to the Object with Object ID 101 (note the context herein is Subgroup ID equal to Object ID.

Reviewer 2: I think just removing the sentence "The Publisher can only set the Priority field flag (0x10) to 0 for the first 64 Subgroups in a Group in the response." would be fine, then.

Reviewer 2: I think just then removing the sentence "The Publisher can only set the Priority field flag (0x10) to 0 for the first 64 Subgroups in a Group in the response." would work.

Reviewer 2: Ahh, sorry, I misunderstood the semantics: there is no such short cut signalling of priority: the Subgroup ID is not present but equal to that of the previous Object plus 1. Therefore forget about my comment regarding that 64 is sufficiently large for the map.

Reviewer 2: > All subsequent Subgroups in the Group MUST set the Priority field flag to 1.

This sentence is not correct, as the following could/would still be used with the Priority field flag equal to 0 without the need of the map:

> 2. Otherwise, if the Object is the first Object in its Subgroup included in the
> FETCH response, the Publisher Priority is the same as the previous Object in the
> response.

Reviewer: I like the compression properties of your suggestion, but it makes the decoder rules even a little more complicated.

```
if object.group_id != previous_group_id:
  subgroup_priorities.clear()
previous_group_id = object.group_id

should_insert = True
if (serialization_byte & 0x10) == 0:
  if previous_object_priority:
    priority = subgroup_priorities[object.subgroup_id]
    if priority is None:
      priority = previous_object_priority
    else:
      should_insert = len(subgroup_priorities) < 64
  else:
    priority = 128
else:
  priority = decode_priority(input)

previous_object_priority = priority
if should_insert:
  subgroup_priorities[object.subgroup_id] = priority
```

Reviewer 2: @afrind Per your code above, if an Object of the n-th Subgroup with n< 64 has priority = 0, then the next Object would have priority = 128.  So I guess "if previous_object_priority:" should be "if previous_object_priority == -1:" if the initial value in the code was set to -1. Of course the initial value in the coded for previous_group_id also needs to be set properly.

A question: for the first Object of a Group, in your understanding, does it always have to have the priority field present? Your code seems implying that, but I cannot find that from the text. Probably we need to add a constraint that, at least for tracks received from Subgroup streams, for the first Object of a Group, the value of the Serialization Flags shall indicate the presence of all the three fields of Group ID, Object ID, and Publisher Priority. However, for tracks received from Datagrams, do we have to do the same?

If we don't specify the same constraint for tracks received from Datagrams (as currently is the case in the text of this PR), then it is possible for first Object of a Group to have the priority field not present, and if so then the current semantics below applies (as for fetching of tracks received from Datagrams, Subgroup ID is set to Object ID, thus each Object is in its own Subgroup and each Object is always "the first Object in its Subgroup"): 

> 2. Otherwise, if the Object is the first Object in its Subgroup included in the
> FETCH response, the Publisher Priority is the same as the previous Object in the
> response.

In other words, I was not suggesting a compression, but was just pointing out what is allowed by the current text of this PR.

> Subgroups in a Group in the response.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
that would cause the size of the Subscriber's map to exceed 64 entries.
